[Silence.]
[Music.]
This little paper recorder has been a big benefit through us and passing through
the time away and our transit out to the moon and it's uh rather hard to see it
floating like this in uh in odyssey while it's playing the seems of 2001. april
13 1970 the mood could only be described as relaxed apollo 13 man's fifth lunar
mission the third scheduled to land on the moon continued its tranquil coast
This is the crew of Apollo 13. Everybody there. Nice evening. We're about ready
to close out our inspection of Aquarius and get back to a pleasant evening and
odyssey. Good night.
13, we've got one more item for you. When you get a chance, we'd like you to
stir up your cryo tanks. In addition, have a shaft and trunnion for a look at
the Comet Bennett if you need it. Okay. Standby.
Okay, Houston, we've had a problem here. This is Houston. Say again, please.
Yes, sir. Houston, we've had a problem. We've had a main B bus undervolt. Roger.
Main B undervolt. Okay, stand by, 13. We're looking at it. And we had a pretty
large bang associated with the caution and warning there. And as I recall, main
B was the one that had an M spike on it once before. In the interim here, we're
starting to go ahead and brighten up the tunnel again.
April 11, 1970, launch day. The crew of Apollo 13. Jim Lovell, commander and
veteran of three previous missions. He had orbited the Moon Christmas 1968 on
Apollo 8. Fred Haise, his first time up, lunar module pilot. Jack Swigert
command module pilot three days ago he was on the backup crew now he replaced
ken mattingly mattingly had been dropped from the mission because he had been
exposed to german measles he would watch the launch from houston's mission
control auto sequence initiated flight roger flight booster so s4b pre-press
complete roger flight booster s1c pre-press complete we're on internal power and
we'll go roger how's it look econ we got your space okay mcc recorders to flight
speed ignition flight
roger
roger okay...looks good here flight good agreement okay that's
once he looks good plane. okay capcom. let's go here on the ground. okay we're
going capcom. get really right
this stuff. how do you look? I look good. right. we go okay powder. we're going.
flight looks good here. guys that's a good fight. okay econ's agency what's good
five looks good flight okay look spines through max you FAQ we're doing with oh
right Roger, Booster. And go for staging, Capcom. Confirm and board out, flight.
Roger.
Staging, flight. Roger. Flight 5, our trajectory confirmed staging. Roger.
Flight, Booster, then board out, was way early. Okay. Flight confirmed, number 5
engine down. Roger. Booster, you don't see any problem with that, though, do
you? Negative, not right now, flight. All the other engines are go. The next
step in the routine of lunar flight was to burn out of Earth orbit toward the
moon. Then pull free of the third stage and dock with the lunar module,
Aquarius. At the controls of the command module, Odyssey, Jax Waggart.
We're hard dock, Houston. Roger, understand hard dock. Good deal. They pulled
Aquarius away from the Saturn third stage, the S-4B. Okay, I can, uh, I can see
the S4B now at the hatch window.
Odyssey and Aquarius moved away from Earth toward the moon.
Okay, Houston, we've had a problem here. Fine guns. Go against. We've had a
hardware restart. I don't know what it wants. Houston, we've had a problem.
We've had a main B bus undervolt. You see an AC bus undervolt guidance, or ECOM?
Negative flight. I believe the crew reported it. We've got a main B undervolt.
We may have had an instrumentation problem flight, Roger. And we had a pretty
large bang associated with the caution and warning. The sensation I had was that
I felt a vibration accompanying the bang, not a large vibration or shutter. Is
there any kind of leads we can give them? Are we looking at instrumentation? We
got a real problem or what? We're reading zero N2 pressure in fuel cell 1 and 13
PSI on fuel cell 302 pressure. Okay, Barrett, what do you want to do? Open
circuit fuel cell 1 and 3? That's for employment. Shut down the reactants valve,
and I ask for a reconfirmation since when you do that it's sort of irreversible.
So if you shut one of these things down, they only can be restarted from ground
support equipment. Yeah. That's because they see and it looks to me looking at
the hatch that we are venting something. We are venting something out into the
space. Okay. Let's everybody think of the kind of things we'd be venting. Do you
see anything that looks abnormal in your system? Negative light. How about you,
EECOM? See anything with the instrumentation you've got that could be venting?
That's a firm flight. Let me look at the system for you, if the venting is
concerned. Okay, let's start scanning. Here is a bulletin from ABC News. The
Apollo 13 spacecraft has had a serious power supply malfunction that could cause
the lunar landing mission to be terminated early. I assume you've called in your
backup e-comes? Flight, say again? Have you called in your backup e-comes now?
See if we can get some more brain power in this thing. We've got one here.
Roger. At the moment, the astronauts are continuing to try to isolate their
trouble. A late report says the spacecraft now is operating on battery power
alone. All unnecessary equipment is being turned off. Okay, now let's everybody
keep cool. We got LMs still attached. The LM spacecraft's good, so if we
need to get back home, we got a LM to do a good portion of it with. Okay,
let's make sure that we don't do anything that's going to blow our CSM
electrical power with the batteries. or that will cause us to lose the main or
the fuel cell number two. Okay, we want to keep the O2 and that kind of stuff
working. We'd like to have RCS, but we've got the command module system, so
we're in good shape if we need to get home. Let's solve the problem, but let's
not make it any worse by guessing. My concern was increasing all the time. It
went from, I wonder what this is going to do, to the landing, to I wonder if we
can get back home again. Okay return. Okay, come. I'm coming back to you.
Flight. Go ahead. I think the best thing we can do right now is start a power
down. Right about then it was quite apparent to me that it was just a question
of time that the command module was going to be dead. You don't want to get fuel
cell pumped off, do you? We can do that on fuel cell number one flight. Okay,
well let's make sure we don't blow the whole mission. The thing that concerns me
is throwing equipment. We had a problem. We don't know the cause of the problem.
Flight, I've got a feeling we've lost two fuel cells. I hate to put it that way,
but I don't know why we've lost them. It doesn't all tag up. Network from Flight
Network. Bring me up another computer in the RTCC, will you? We've got one
machine on the RTCC, and we've got dual CPs downstairs. Okay, I want another
machine up in the RTCC, and I want a bunch of guys capable of running D-logs
down there. Roger that. What all this means is only speculation at this point.
First, though there has been some tumbling or rotation of the spacecraft, the
astronauts do not appear to be in any immediate danger. I'll tell you what, GNC,
can you get somebody in the back room to try to figure out what the equivalent
delta V is we're getting so that we can see if we can backtrack to see if we can
figure out what's vending? Roger, we'll give it a try, Flight. Okay. When I
looked up and saw both, oxygen pressures one absolutely zero another one going
down it it dawned on me and I'm sure jack and spread about the same time that we
were indeed in serious trouble the only way to survive the situation was to
transfer to the LM flighty com the pressure no two tank one is all the way
down to 297 you better think about getting in the lamb or using the LM systems
I'd say this is as serious a situation as we have ever had in manned space
flight. We've always called the LM a good lifeboat under those circumstances.
If at any time in the mission, however, the LM had separated and we had gotten
ourselves into a rendezvous situation or the command module being around the
moon, then what you state is absolutely true. It would be a fatal situation.
Telling me you're from flight? Go ahead, White. I want you to get some guys
figuring out minimum power in the land to sustain life. The accident had
occurred 200,000 miles from Earth. Lovell, Swigert, and Haise rode in the lunar
module, attached to a lifeless command module. Apollo 13 had started as a
mission of scientific exploration. It was now a matter of survival. Since the
command module was dead except for the oxygen and power hoarded for reentry the
guidance platform of aquarius designed to land on and take off from the moon
would have to be used the first milestone and I consider this after the accident
I guess more or less the survival now the first milestone was to get alignment
on the LM platform alignments are important you know because without knowing
exactly which way the attitude of the spacecraft is in space, there's no way to
tell how to burn or how to use the engines of that spacecraft to get the proper
trajectory to come home. In the position we are now in the Earth-Moon plane, we
have to go around the Moon to get back if we're going to use the Dips engine.
You would have had enough capability with the SPS engine, but of course we don't
dare use that now. So we have to go to the back of the moon and come back. To
get into the correct orbit around the moon, the crew had burned out of a
trajectory that would automatically bring them back to Earth. They would have to
get back onto a safe course toward Earth. He needs to put his throttle to men
also, flight. Throttle to men? Yes, he's at 29% now, roughly. This maneuver
again was completed on time. And because it was a manual burn, we had a three
-man operation. Jack would take care of the time. He'd tell us when to light off
the engine, when to stop it. Fred handled the pitch maneuver, I handled the roll
maneuver, and I pushed the buttons to start and stop the engines.
You go for the burn. 40%. Okay, Aquarius, you're looking good.
Auto shutdown. The first problem was solved. They were back on the path to
Earth. But there were many other problems to be solved. From a building at
Houston's Manned Spacecraft Center, systems experts coordinated the coast-to
-coast effort to get the crew back. One of the big problems was consumables.
There would be enough to eat and drink. But in space, there are other factors.
Oxygen to breathe. Electrical power to keep the spacecraft alive. Water to cool
the equipment and keep it operating. What we'll be doing until we get them back
on the water is concentrating on everything that their lives are dependent upon
at the moment rather than worrying about the accident, because there's nothing
we can do about that now. It appears at the present time that everything is
under control and that we have a safe situation at the moment. Hey, I want to
say you guys are doing real good work. So are you guys, Jack. We are about 70
hours from home. And we think we have the situation in control. We've projected
the consumables, as I've described. And we have a plan for carrying out the rest
of the mission. But there's going to be no relaxation at all, as far as that
goes, from now until Splash. There was a key decision to be made before Apollo
13 went behind the moon. Where to bring them down. Their present course would
take them to the Indian Ocean, where recovery would be difficult. A burn to
bring them home quicker would take them to the Pacific Ocean near the recovery
forces. Bringing them home even faster would place them in the South Atlantic,
again away from recovery forces. It was decided to take them to the Pacific.
We were in the simulators built in at the cape, and the contractors continuously, ever since last night,
We've tried to simulate virtually everything that we've had the crew do that's not normal, that they've done.
And we've proven most everything that we've been able to run on the simulator prior to passing it up.
There may be
some details we haven't done! But at least we've checked the feasibility of
everything we've done and we'll continue to do that. They passed 137 miles from
the moon. For Lovell, it was the second time that he had seen the moon so near.
But there was no time for contemplation, there was another critical burn coming.
Okay, let's get the camera spread away. Let's get off, that's the burn. We have
one can, Sal! and in Houston the newsman poured in to tell an anxious world the
story
shortly after Apollo 13 had separated from the Saturn third stage the stage had
been sent on to a trajectory toward the moon its impact would be recorded by the
seismometer left by Apollo 12. By the way, Aquarius, we see the results now from
the 12 seismometer. Looks like your booster just hit the moon and it's rockin'
it a little bit. Well, at least people have worked on this flight. I'm sure glad
we didn't have a LM impact too. Jim, you go for the burn. Go for the burn.
Roger. Understand, go for the burn. Guidance okay? We're good, Flight. Control
okay? We're okay, Flight. Tell me. We're go, Flight. G.O. okay? We're good,
Flight. Ground confirms ignition. well-calling, 40%. West Houston, you're
looking good. Roger.
Shut down. Roger, shut down. I say that was a good burn. Roger, now we want to
power down as soon as possible. I understand. To conserve the electric power and
cooling water, the crew shut down all but the vital, life-sustaining systems of
the LM. I think the LM spacecraft's in excellent shape, and I think it's fully
capable of getting the crew back. I think, as we have found before, every time
we put the LM spacecraft to a test, it's always done much more than it was
guaranteed to do, and I think this is a good case in point. Conserve the
consumables. Cooling water. Electric power. The LM water gun was leaking, and
we shut that off. I guess it leaked about a quart of water, I would estimate.
But it took me about two days to get my feet dry, and of course I think you were
all aware that the temperatures were going down in both vehicles, and it's made
for very chilly feet for a couple days.
[Sound effects.]
Lord, your astronauts will come back safe. If I may be serious for one moment
and ask the entire audience for a moment of prayer for the crewmen of the Apollo
13. We'll hold silence for a moment, please.
[Silence.]
RCSA stands at 62% and B at 62%. Excellent.
That's the reason we have gone a hell of a long time without any sleep. We have
to start thinking about getting people back to sleep again because I didn't get
out of any sleep last night at all. Command module just slowly kept going down in temperature
until I think just prior to re-entry it was down to about 38 degrees. And along
with that there was a sort of a chilling Coldness, the walls were perspiring the
windows were completely wet and it wasn't too healthy I recall that we went
there to get some hot dogs one day and it was like going in with a freezer for
the food
want my opinion on how they handled the situation when it happened, they handled
it exactly like we'd expect them to. They were about as well on top of it as
anybody could be who knew what we knew, which isn't very much, I'll have to
admit, but I think they did everything right within the knowledge it was
available to us in a timely fashion which is what all we expected of them I
think they did a beautiful job of it we actually had a third little sleep
restraint which Fred does then put on and buttoned up and kept a little bit warm
the astronauts faced another problem their own exhaled breath the lithium
hydroxide chemical to take carbon dioxide out of the air was not sufficient in
the lunar module they would have to adapt the canisters from the command module
to fit the hoses in the limits on the ground an adapter was fashioned from
materials the crew had available in the LM cardboard from a checklist plastic
bags and tape after check out in an environmental chamber the directions for
construction were sent up to aquarius at this point in time, I think the partial
pressure of carbon dioxide was reading about 1500 millimeters and we constructed
two of these things and put them on a line and I think within an hour the
partial pressure of CO2 was down to two tenths So you'll see that survival now
became one of initiative and ingenuity and it was one which the ground
continually helped us along We had all kinds of people on the ground trying to
think of ways of extending our lifetime. There would be still another burn, a
mid-course correction to get Apollo 13 into the narrow corridor through the
atmosphere for a safe return to Earth. Where'd burn attitude, flight? College.
Ignition.
The thrust looks good.
shut down. Hang in there. It won't be long. There were moments when I didn't
know how much consumables we had, whether we could make it back or not. In a
situation like that, there's only one thing you can do. You just keep going. And
you just keep thinking up where you can get more consumables. And so that's
exactly what we did. On April 17th, they prepared for re-entry.
After a small course correction burn, they jettisoned the damaged service
module. SSNP. Copy that. And there's one whole side of that big business. Is
that right? The whole panel is blown out, almost from the base to the entrance.
Really a mess. Man, that's unbelievable. next they got back into odyssey to
jettison aquarius prior to entry into the atmosphere okay copy that farewell
aquarius thank you okay los in uh a minute or a minute and a half uh an entry
attitude we'd like omni charlie and welcome home. thank you.
[Static.]
how is Houston standing by? over.
[Applause.]
Houston, we see you... and it really looks great.
Apollo 13. Apollo 13. This is recovery over...This is recovery and your chutes look good.
Apollo 13. This is recovery. We
observed your RCS burn. It's recovery Apollo 13 is descending. Apollo 13. This
is recovery over...
The vertical axis are approximately 15 degrees... Web 1, Russia. Web 1 or Russia.
8-2-2-2-7-0.
[Music and applause.]
I recall, Captain, that when I spoke to you on the phone, you said that you
regretted that you were unable to complete your mission. I hereby declare that
this was a successful mission. From the start, the exploration of space has been
hazardous adventure. The voyage of Apollo 13 dramatized its risks. The men of
Apollo 13, by their poise and skill under the most intense kind of pressure,
epitomized the character that accepts danger and surmounts it. Theirs is the
spirit that built America. Your mission served your country. It served to remind
us all of our proud heritage of a nation, to remind us that in this age of
technicians and scientific marvels, that the individual still counts, that in a
crisis, the character of a man or of men will make the difference.
GNC. Go. Surgeons. Go. Procedures. Go. AFD. Go. Network. Go. No. Computer
suit? No. Roger, that works. Give me an amber. RTC on FD conference. RTC is on
FD conference. OK, all flight controllers, let's play it cool.
[Music.]